HTML: Structure, Semantics and FPO
CSS: Structure, the Box Model, Positioning
Responsive Layouts
Reset v Normalise CSS Files
Flexbox
CSS Grid Layout
CSS Transitions, Transformations and Animations

### Responsive Layouts:
Page Layout - the Size and Positioning of elements on a page. Examples - static, liquid, adaptive and responsive.
Media Query - a CSS feature that makes it possible to apply styling based on boolean logic.
Breakpoint - the specific amounts that media queries reference(usually in pixels).
CSS Reset - A set styles that applies default styling.
Viewpoint Meta Tag - A html tag that is used to describe attributes that affect how the page is displayed.

#### Page Layouts: 
**Static Page Layout** - fixed width, sits in the centre of the screen.
**Liquid Page Layout** - uses relative units rather than fixed units, percentages instead of pixels.
**Adaptive Page Layout** - Uses CSS media queries to detect the width of the browser and make layout adjustments accordingly. Less time to build than responsive. Screen widths that sit between the brakpoints can feel awkward.
**Responsive Page Layout** - Look like adaptive but are better. Uses both relative units and media queries.

##### Media Queries 
A boolean chunk of logic that lives in the CSS.
Break points are the pixel width that the media queries reference.
When the media query is true, the specific breakpoint will be applied.

@media screen and (min-width: 900px) {
    body {
        background: magenta;
    }
}

Before adding media queries, need to have - 
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">


1. Reset vs Normalise CSS Files and Idiomatic CSS
### Reset vs Normalise
Browsers give plain HTML a set of default styles, these can interfere with our layout.
Good/common practice to clear out default styles with one of two files.
Two css files that you can copy and include in your css directory, keep it seperate
Reduces the browser inconsistencies
All browsers has defaults
Reset - sets everything back to zero or null, remove so useful defaults, easier to maintain
Normalise - less extreme, harder to maintain, cross-browser compatibility

### Idioamatic CSS 
Make code easier to read with a style guide
Common-sense approach
Want it to be accessible and readable by other people

2. Image Optimisation
64% of the web 
JPEG - small, reduced quality 
PNG - bigger, higher quality
GIF - medium quality
SVG - big, high quality at any size
Sprites - collections of images

3. Performance and Organisation

### Selectors
-  Universal Rules - apply to everything
- tag - applys to everything with that tag
- .class - specific, applied to everything with that class
- #id - specific, overrides everything, single use

- Can create a pathway to tags:
header p a {}
The browser looks up this tree of selectors until it narrows down the matches

Two other things:
- Rule Hashes
- Ancestor Filters

Most of the time you will just use classes 

## Optimisation
You want to use universal rules as little as possible, as they will always be applied
Better to split the code up into classes and tags if one attribute is going to change alot 

## Why is it useful?
Writing you're code by following so selector rules makes it easier maintain, more readable and less error prone

## How can it effect/improve/negativly impact developement process
Compound Selectors - creates alot of errors, difficult to maintain

## Any useful resources 
CSS tricks
Organising and Planning Content - Scaleable and Modular Architecture for CSS

4. Transitions, Transformations and Animations 


## Flexbox
A tool for centering items vertically/horizontally.

To set up a flexbox layout, you'll need two components:
A container element, known as the flex container
The items inside the flex container, known as flex items

The flex container needs a CSS display value of flex (or inline-flex, if you want the flex container to render inline), and a few other new properties will determine how the flex items are laid out.

Helpful for aligning, shrinking, growing, wrapping items on to different lines, ordering them differently on the page.

### Grid 
Notes in Grid practice folder