# Week 2 Web Development - JavaScript Fundamentals

See JavaScript.md for all JavaScript notes, including:
- Data Types, Variables, Conditionals and Functions
- Scope, Arrays and For Loops
- Objects, 'this' and constructor functions

See below for:
- Introduction to DOM manipulation
- Event Bubbling and Delegation 
- localStorage and JSON


Using tests suites to understand whats going on, testign what you think the code should do to see if actually does it.

## Introduction to DOM manipulation
### DOM - Document Object Model
A tree-like representation of the contents of a webpage - a tree of nodes with different relationships depending on how they're arranged in the HTML document.

Can make changes to the DOM without changing the actual source code

Two instances where the source-code and DOM are different:
The browser automatically fixes problems in the source code
Making client side changes

All items in the DOM are defined as nodes. There are many types of nodes, but there are three main ones that we work with most often:

Element nodes
Comment nodes
Text Nodes

== $0
console 
$0.nodetype

Any node has a corresponding integer value

reference javascript in script 

DOM structure - is the same as html sturcture
DOM tree elements


**Targeting Nodes with Selectors**
When working with the DOM, you use “selectors” to target the nodes you want to work with. You can use a combination of CSS-style selectors and relationship properties to target the nodes you want.


## Events
Events are actions that occur on your webpage such as mouse-clicks or keypresses, using JavaScript we can make our webpage listen and react to these events.

Three ways to go about this:

Attach function attributes directly on your HTMl elements.
    
    <button onclick="alert('Hello World')">Click Me</button>

This solution is less than ideal because we’re cluttering our HTML with JavaScript. Also, we can only have 1 “onclick” event per element.


Set the "on_event_" property on the DOM object in your JavaScript.
    
    // the html file
    <button id="btn">Click Me</button>

    // the JavaScript file
    let btn = document.querySelector('#btn');
    btn.onclick = () => alert("Hello World");



Attach event listeners to the nodes in your JavaScript - preferred method.
    
    // the html file
    <button id="btn">Click Me Too</button>
    
    // the JavaScript file
    let btn = document.querySelector('#btn');
    btn.addEventListener('click', () => {
    alert("Hello World");
    });


### Attaching Listeners to Groups of Nodes
Can get a node list of all the items matching a specific selector with querySelectorAll('selector')
In order to add a listener for each of them, can iterate through whole list:
    
    <div id="container">
    <button id="1">Click Me</button>
    <button id="2">Click Me</button>
    <button id="3">Click Me</button>
    </div>

        // buttons is a node list. It looks and acts much like an array.
    const buttons = document.querySelectorAll('button');

    // we use the .forEach method to iterate through each button
    buttons.forEach((button) => {

    // and for each one we add a 'click' listener
    button.addEventListener('click', (e) => {
        alert(button.id);
    });
    });

Some useful events that are not 'click' include:

click
dblclick
keypress
keydown
keyup
  

## Event Bubbling and Delegation

Event Handlers - functions that will run when an event happens
Event Propagation - the order in which different DOM events are notified of an event
Event Capturing - part of the event propagation model, where listeners are fired from the top of the DOM tree, down (first thing to happen)
Event Targeting - event Targeting Part of the event propagation model wherein listeners are fired on the source of the event ( middle thing to happen )
Event Bubbling - part of the event propagation model where listeners are fired from the target of the event, up (last thing to happen)
Event Delegation - the process of using event propagation to handle events at a higher level in the DOM than the element on which the event originated

Events happen all the time - a page loading, a user moving the mouse, pressing down on a key
What we are doing is setting up handlers for events that interest us - wait on a DOM node until the event they are waiting for is fired, then run an appropriate function or respond as required.

### Problems with events
Setting multiple listeners on the same node
Creating a memory leak if an event listener is not unbound from an element when it is removed from the DOM.


### Event Propagation
Event propagation - overarching term that includes the three different phases of DOM events - capturing, targeting, bubbling.
It is bi-directional - starts at the window, goes to the target and ends at the window.
Often improperly used as a synonym for event bubbling.

Every time an event occurs, event propagation is occurring behind the scenes.

### Event Bubbling
Refers to the ability of events set on DOM nodes to "bubble up" - also apply to children of these nodes.

If an event is placed on a parent element, the event will fire both when the action occurs on the parent and on the child.

If the nested elements all have different events, the highest ancestor will override all of the others. Their event will be triggered if you click on any of the elements regardless.

### useCapture 
    document.querySelector('#click-me').addEventListener('click', function (event) {
        console.log('Button');
    }, true);

Can be used to stop an event firing on bubble, instead fires on capture. Won't be effected by bubbling up. Basically means, a child can be given a different action if a parent is set to useCapture.

After initiating capture, all events of the specified type will be dispatched to the registered listener before being dispatched to any EventTargets beneath it in the DOM tree. Events which are bubbling upward through the tree will not trigger a listener designated to use capture.

### The Event Object
Inside an event handler function, might see a parameter specified with a name such as event, evt or e.
This is called the event object, and it is automatically passed to event handlers to provide extra features and information.

An example is MouseEvent - MouseEvents contain information about the x and y coordinates where the mouse was clicked.

### Event Delegation

In event delegation, we take advantage of the fact that events bubble in the event loops by setting an event listener on one parent. This event listener analyzes bubbled events to find a match in its child elements. Event delegation is one of the most helpful patterns for DOM events. It simplifies things and can save memory since there is no need to add many handlers.

The algorithim:

Put a single handler on a container
In the handler - check the source element using event.target

If the event happened inside an element that interests us, then handle the event

var buttonDiv = document.querySelector('.parent');

buttonDiv.addEventListener('click', function(event) {
  if (event.target.className === 'button') {
    // do your action on your 'button' or whatever it is you're listening for
  }
});

## localStorage and JSON

Client-side Storage: storage on the client side, usually the browser.
Server-side Storage: storage on the server side.
Local-storage: an implementation of client-side storage. Data with no expiration date that will persist after the browser window is closed.
Session-storage: data that get cleared after the browser window is closed. Useful for saving data such as user preferences, whether a user is logged in, and whats in a shopping cart.

JSON (JavaScript Object Notation): a lightweight data-interchange format.
Data-attributes: a way of storing information related to the data model on an html element.

Previously cooke=ies were the only option for rememebring this type of local, temporary data.

### localStorage
localStorage is a property you can call on the global window variable within your browser, just like you can call document, that allows you to access a local storage object for persisting data

Supports the following methods:

- localStorage.setItem(); takes two arguments—a key and value (key must be string)—and stores the given value under the provided key.

- localStorage.getItem(); gets an item from storage based on the key provided.

- localStorage.removeItem(); takes a key and removes that key and its associated value from storage.

- localStorage.clear(); removes all items from storage for that domain.

### JSON
HTTP transport protocol for communicating with servers.
HTTP powers the web but has one limitation - can only sendinformation as strings.

JSON = 'JavaScript Object Notation"
Subset of JavaScript's object syntax.
Alternative to XML for sending inofrmation back and forth across the web.

JSON has the following rules:

Keys must be double quoted.
Values must be one of the following types:
Strings, double quoted
Numbers
Booleans
Arrays
Objects
Keys can only be properties, not methods
Therefore, values cannot be functions

#### JSON is a means of sending data.
The browser provides a JSON object with two methods.

JSON.stringify(); turns any JavaScript object into valid JSON. - before storing in local storage.

JSON.parse(); turns any valid JSON into a JavaScript object. - after retrieving from local storage.

Complete Workflow in Console
The goal is to take our object, store it in local storage, and then be able to take the object out of local storage and modify the object.

let objectToStore = { crust: 'deep dish', type: 'veggie' };

let stringifiedObject = JSON.stringify(objectToStore); stringifiedObject (Notice our object has turned into a string!)

localStorage.setItem('somethingComplicated', stringifiedObject); (Stores the object in local storage)

Now the object is in local storage, and we can retrieve it out of local storage.

let retrievedObject = localStorage.getItem('somethingComplicated');

retrievedObject (Notice this is still the stringified version of our object - we need it to be a real object again, not a string)
let parsedObject = JSON.parse(retrievedObject);

parsedObject (We are now back to our original object!)